# Introduction

This thesis will focus on the most common form of prostate cancer, prostatic
adenocarcinoma. For simplicity, we will refer to this type as just 'prostate
cancer.' Prostatic cancer is a disease of the epithelial cells of the prostate.
Epithelial cells line our body cavities, our hollow organs, and glands. They
undergo rapid proliferation, primarily due to damage. This proliferation
increases the risk of genetic mutations, ultimately increasing the risk of a
cell uncontrollably dividing. Together with enabling factors of its tissue
environment, this can give rise to cancer.

# The Gleason grading system

In general, the more aggressive cancerous cells are, the less they will behave
and morphologically appear like their original function. The prostate is a
gland that produces prostatic fluid. The fluid is transported to the urethra by
small tubes. These tubes, called prostatic glands, are lined with epithelium.
Low-grade cancer will thus mimic those gland structures. High-grade prostate
cancer loses its structural morphology, forming sheets of cells or even
quasi-randomly dispersed individual cancerous cells.

American pathologist Donald Floyd Gleason systematically wrote down the
correlation between growth patterns and prognosis in prostate cancer in the
1960s[@cite]. Pathologists still use this Gleason grading, albeit several
revisions later[@cite], to classify prostate cancer.

[Insert image Gleason grown patterns]

# Prognostic biomarkers

The Gleason grading system can be considered a biomarker as it indicates the
prognosis of a patient with prostate cancer[@chen2011]. Traditionally
clinicians use nomograms to decide treatment protocols, which combine the
clinical characteristics of the patients with other diagnostic tests, such as
histopathological, radiological assessment, and lab assessments. The more
precise these assessments are, the better we can tailor the treatment to the
specific patient, this is known as personalized medicine.[@cite] 

### Genomic biomarkers (mutations & prostateDx etc)

### trying to leverage machine learning to make radiology/pathology reports more precise

# Introduce Deep Learning

### examples of pathology research (Wouter's gleason papers etc)

# Introduce the dimensionality problem of computation pathology 

### Introduce weakly supervised methods 

### Conclude that they are shit. 

